---
layout: page
---

In 2016, Bruno Mars released an album called _24k Magic_. This was coming off the massive success of “Uptown Funk,” which had major retro vibes. 24k Magic was also deliberately retro in sound, according to Mars. In an interview with Rolling Stone, he says the album is meant to sound like early 90s R&B—like slow-dancing at a junior high dance to “Before I Let You Go” by Blackstreet.

This comes through clearly in "Versace on the Floor", which was the third single off the album. Let's listen.

Music critics in 2016 all make note of “Versace”’s throwback sound. They compare it to:

- Marvin Gaye's "sexual healing"
- 1984 New Edition
- Freddie Jackson's "Rock Me Tonight"
- an old Shanice song that wouldn't have sounded out of place on the original 90210 soundtrack, and
- Boyz II Men's "I'll Make Love to You" repurposed for the Dirty Dancing soundtrack.

All the songs are from what I like to refer to as the “long 1980s”—mainstream pop music and R&B has a relatively consistent sound through the early 1990s. It’s unsurprising that even if Bruno Mars says this is meant to be early ’90s, a lot of the intertexts are actually with mid- to late-’80s music.

Let's zoom in on the more specific song references. Take a listen to these excerpts of all 3 songs and see if you hear what I hear.

You could probably guess I wanted you to notice the pretty prominent electric piano in each track. But if you listen super duper closely, they each actually use a different electric piano. Marvin Gaye I think uses a Roland Jupiter-8, Freddie Jackson is absolutely a DX7, and Boyz II Men sounds like maybe a Korg M1. Mars's own point of comparison, Blackstreet, sounds more like a classic Fender Rhodes.

But realistically, the subtle differences between these sounds kind of melt away when you listen to these songs all in sequence. For a normal listener, this all just sounds like one instrument:an '80s (or '90s) electric piano.

As a scholar of an immensely popular 1980s synthesizer with a very famous electric piano preset, it’s this electric piano sound that immediately grabbed my attention on first hearing “Versace.” It doesn’t sound like just any electric piano: the timbre is specifically that of a Yamaha DX7 electric piano preset. I hoped to find album reviewers noting the technological homage, but I suppose this detail is too niche for general audiences; nevertheless, the songs they choose to compare with “Versace” suggest that reviewers do hear the connection, because an electric piano sound of the long 1980s is highly likely to be coming from a DX7 using the E. PIANO 1 preset. So when I heard “Versace” and its distinctly ’80s sound, I immediately wanted to know whether Mars did in fact use a DX7 on the recording; if so, I could hold up the song as an exemplar of a twenty-first-century resurgence of the DX7. But as I will show, definitive evidence one way or the other was hard to find.

[click through outline] In this talk, I'll use “Versace on the Floor” and the Yamaha DX7 E. PIANO 1 sound to illustrate the problems one might encounter when researching synthesizers in recent popular music. I argue that researchers don’t need to think of accurate instrument identification as a prerequisite for analyzing a song’s use of that instrument, because it’s already significant that the timbre suggests the instrument. I support this through my case study of the “Imagined DX7”: the DX7 as it lives in popular consciousness, derived from memories and imaginings of its most well-known and imitated factory presets. I explore how the E. PIANO 1 preset outgrew the DX7, complicating the sonic identity of the instrument, but simultaneously solidifying a certain timbral signature that captures its essence—the Imagined DX7. I also discuss the technological changes—MIDI and the decline of the music trade magazine—that take away sources of truth for identifying instruments, a process that begins in the 1980s and continues to the present day. By considering timbre as the instrument, I show how researchers can analyze synthesizers in recent pop music through intertextuality and listener reception, areas that are unaffected or even enriched by possible inaccuracies in the instrument identification.

## DX7 History

I'll try to keep this super brief since I've published about it elsewhere. You can see some details on the slide. The takeaway is that the DX7 was truly ubiquitous in the long 1980s, and even if you don’t know it by name, if you listened to pop music in the 80s or 90s, you absolutely know the sound: [play]

That was, of course, the electric piano preset, E. PIANO 1. The DX7 popularized the use of synthesizer presets, rather than custom sounds.

When the DX7 debuted, E. PIANO 1 was valued as a replacement for the then-standard Fender Rhodes—most people even referred to it just as the "Rhodes sound" rather than calling it E. PIANO 1. But compare the two sounds.

The timbral differences between the two sounds are clear, and thus E. PIANO 1’s distinct identity emerged and became equally important to pop music culture in ensuing decades. In other words, E. PIANO 1 was no longer seen as a Rhodes replacement, but rather as an important sound in its own right.

As the DX7’s E. PIANO 1 grew thoroughly entrenched in popular music, some musicians tweaked and customized this sound by layering it together with effects or other similar sounds. Synthesizer manufacturers looking to dethrone Yamaha from its market dominance—particularly Roland and Korg—likewise offered up their own takes on the electric piano patch that musicians had come to expect on their instruments. Today, musicians often use virtual instruments that mimic the signature DX7 sound. Through this process, over the course of more than forty years since its debut, the E. PIANO 1 sound evolves into something larger than just a preset on the DX7.

## Imitators

In the next section I examine electric piano factory presets on the two most significant post-DX7 synthesizers: the Roland D-50 and the Korg M1. Besides these synthesizers, I’ll also Dexed, a software-based DX7 substitute. By perpetuating its signature timbral essence, each of these sounds reifies the standing of E. PIANO 1 (and by extension the DX7) as an essential pop music sound, while simultaneously broadening the range of timbres a listener might reasonably conflate with that of E. PIANO 1.

### D-50

When Roland released the D-50 synthesizer in 1987, four years after the DX7, it included a preset titled not “Electric Piano”, but “Synthetic Electric” (#28), indicating that the goal was not to imitate a real electric piano like a Fender Rhodes or Wurlitzer, but to imitate an imitation. Of course, Roland doesn’t name the DX7 or Yamaha specifically—they’re the competition, after all—but contextually, the implication is clear. 1987 was the height of the DX7’s dominance, and writers for trade magazines inevitably compared the two synths.

Close listening and spectrogram analysis indeed reveals significant differences between the DX7 and D-50 sounds, but crucial similarities remain. Where the DX7 preset is pure, hollow, and sparse, the D-50 preset is noisy, full, and rich, making the two sounds easy enough to distinguish when presented side-by-side. But other aspects of the D-50 preset tip the hat to the DX7: in particular, a tell-tale bump in amplitude in the 3,000–4,000 Hz range of Figure 4 lends a piercing, bright quality that is characteristic of the DX7; on top of this, the D-50 boasts a second, larger bump in the 6,000–9,000 Hz range. Both sounds also have noticeable acoustic beating at a similar rate. Listen and see what you think.

The two sounds are not identical by any means, but the DX7 influence is audible, and less savvy listeners may be forgiven for conflating them.

Compare this against the D-50’s other electric piano preset, #88 “PCM E-Piano.” Pulse-code modulation (PCM) samples were a key component of the linear arithmetic synthesis technique that was, at the time, unique to the D-50; including PCM in the name signals that Roland does _not_ want this electric piano sound to remind you of the DX7. The PCM E-Piano preset prominently features inharmonic partials between the harmonic partials, adding dissonance to the onset of the sound. The PCM E-Piano also mixes in a breathiness or noisiness that I hear as characteristic of the D-50, and the pitch wavers with a slight vibrato that amplifies the effect of the acoustic beating.

Yet PCM E-Piano still retains a certain DX7 quality, thanks to an extraordinarily sustained upper partial that continues to ring even after the fundamental frequency has faded. This frequency is right in the 3,000–4,000 Hz range of Figure 5, just like the DX7’s prominent upper partials. Of the two sounds, Synthetic Electric has a stronger resemblance to the DX7—and a more prominent place on the list of presets, perhaps because players will look for it first—but the legacy of the DX7 also imprints upon the PCM E-Piano.

### M1

The Korg M1 was released in 1988 and eventually became the best-selling synthesizer of all time, overthrowing the DX7. Its four electric piano presets—E. Piano 1, 2, 3, and 4—all seem to imitate the DX7’s E. PIANO 1. Note in the spectrogram the prominent acoustic beats and the pair of particularly bright partials in the upper register. Each M1 E. Piano is slightly different—the characteristic brightness takes a slightly different shape, and the overall brightness or darkness varies—but the beating and the E. PIANO 1 brightness is non-negotiable here. Any of the E. Piano presets on the M1 could be confused for the DX7 E. PIANO 1, but particularly close is E. Piano 4, which creates the characteristic brightness with the exact same overtones as the DX7. Only a bit of extra noisiness, visible in the green halo at the start of each M1 sound in the spectrogram, is the main audible difference.

### Dexed

If accurately identifying a DX7 was complicated in the 1990s, it’s even more so today, since anyone with an internet connection can install virtual studio technologies (VSTs) that mimic the DX7. Dexed by Digital Suburban, a free and open-source VST, is “closely modeled on the original DX7 characteristics,” according to its developer. Dexed supports SysEx messages, which means that a user can send the original DX7 presets to Dexed as data, and Dexed can read and render that same data. A spectrogram confirms that there is little to no difference between Dexed’s rendition of the E. PIANO 1 preset compared to the DX7’s. The present-day music maker doesn’t need a DX7 to get an authentic DX7 sound—this free VST and the right soundbanks (which are also free) create an indistinguishable imitation.

### Summary

This table visualizes the relationships among the sounds discussed in the prior paragraphs in an opposition table. In the leftmost column are opposed pairs of timbre descriptors, defined in Lavengood (2020). For each instrument discussed, I have indicated which of the two opposed terms better describes the sound of the instrument. To make the differences among instruments readily visible, the negative sign (−) represents the term on the left of the slash, and the positive sign (+) the term on the right. Since the DX7 E. PIANO 1 sound is the basis for comparison in this analysis, I have assigned all the E. PIANO 1 qualities to the negative side of the opposition. This allows the differences between E. PIANO 1 and any other sound to be immediately visually apparent: each positive sign corresponds to an audible timbral distinction from E. PIANO 1. Notice what remains consistent among all the sounds: they are bright, beating, steady, and harmonic sounds; these are the timbral signatures of E. PIANO 1.

On top of all of these possibilities, musicians have always been wont to simply tinker with a preset to get a familiar but unique sound. While programming new sounds felt out of reach for many DX7 players, trade magazines published guides to creating new patches on the DX7 (as well as other popular synthesizers), including variations on the electric piano sound, so listeners may have heard an altered electric piano sound and assumed it was E. PIANO 1 because it came from a DX7. Another way of building on the E. PIANO 1 sound is layering other similar sounds on top of it (often described as “fattening” the sound). For example, an article in Keyboard interviewing the three keyboardists and three keyboard techs who worked on Michael Jackson’s “Bad” tour describes having “a lot of electric piano sounds to perfect” (Doerschuk 1988, 77) requiring an array of (digital) synthesizers and patches: a Synclavier, a Yamaha KX76, and a Yamaha TX802 rack-mount. A casual listener of popular music is unlikely to detect all the distinct sources of these sounds within the context of a single album or tour. Instead, E. PIANO 1 agglomerates all these sounds onto itself, like a Katamari ball rolling over pop music of the long 1980s. This is what I call the “Imagined DX7”: this collection of timbres, perceived as a unified instrument despite the variety of hardware and software used to produce it.

## The Imagined DX7

The Imagined DX7 is the result of this proliferation and entrenchment of the lumped-together sounds of E. PIANO 1 and its imitators. As awareness of the DX7 sound grew, listeners began crediting the synth for sounds it didn't actually produce. The authentic DX7 sound also becomes blurred as these other sounds repeatedly pass as DX7 sounds.

I see the Imagined DX7 operating as far back as 1986, where in a letter to the editor of Keyboard magazine, a reader blames the DX7 for the sins of the Fairlight CMI (which predates the DX7):

> How I miss the good old pre-DX7 days. I am so sick of reading about these Fairlight freaks and one-finger virtuosos. … Why don't you interview a real keyboard player, like Rick Wakeman?

This quote does not attribute a specific sound to the DX7, but it does treat the DX7 as emblematic of all synthesizer usage at that time, including usage of Fairlights and arpeggiators. So even in 1986, the DX7 was already more than a synthesizer.

Or consider this quote from a podcast episode titled "The ’80s: Were They Really That Bad?" Here Bob Boilen says, or at least implies, that the DX7 is the common thread that ties together a bunch of songs they just played. The songs were "Let's Hear It for the Boy", "Wild Wild West," and "You Make My Dreams Come True”—and actually none of those songs use the DX7.

I want to emphasize that I would not attribute these cases of mistaken identity to ignorance, at least not in all the cases I give above. After all, the letter to the editor was written by someone who subscribes to Keyboard magazine, so the letter-writer ostensibly knows about synthesizers. Bob Boilen, for his part, is himself a synthesizer player, and had a long career directing music and music-related content for NPR. I am certain Boilen knows the DX7 was not on those tracks—but accurate synthesizer identification was not his aim in that moment. The point was to transition the conversation to a broader discussion of music production trends of the 1980s, and that conversation must include the DX7. More interesting to me than pointing out the mistakes is what the mistakes signify: that many people imagine a sound comes from a DX7 even when it doesn’t.

Going in the opposite direction, the DX7 sound so saturated popular music of the long 1980s that the original sound of an actual Fender Rhodes was forgotten by a substantial population. A Keyboard article about creating a good Rhodes sound suggests aiming for the sound on Michael Bolton’s “How Am I Supposed to Live Without You” (Jimmerson 1990), which (to my ears at least) is a DX7 rather than a Rhodes. Another article from the magazine reflects this when they write hyperbolically of “an entire generation of players out there who think a Rhodes really sounded like any of the myriad Yamaha DX7 sounds bearing its name” (Wiffen and Vail 1988, 91). Paul Wiffen goes even further, giving an anonymized anecdote about a “famous producer” criticizing Wiffen’s “painstakingly sampled” Rhodes for sounding “nothing like any electric piano he’d ever heard” and insinuates that the producer’s memory had been tainted by repeated exposure to DX7-esque electric pianos (Wiffen and Vail 1988, 91). Perhaps this is better understood as the Imagined Rhodes than the Imagined DX7, but either way, these incidents attest to the fuzzy boundaries of the DX7’s electric piano sound—many experienced listeners can’t discern where the DX7 begins and ends.

## Implications

The Imagined DX7 functions in part due to what Cornelia Fales (2002) identifies as the “paradox of timbre”—even while timbre is the strongest aural clue we have for identifying a sound source, timbre is most susceptible to being warped by our minds when compared to rhythm or pitch. Human perception shapes our hearing of a timbre profoundly. When assessing the likely source of a timbre, we are informed in part by the physical acoustic signal, but just as important are cultural and contextual clues: where we are, who else is around us, why sounds are being made, and so forth. Why would an observer, hearing a stereotypical “bright” and “clean” digitally synthesized sound in a 1980s performance and seeing the musician play a DX7, _not_ assume that the sound is generated by the DX7 (despite the possibility that the DX7 is merely a controller for the true sound source)? In a situation where the sound source would be surprising, contextual clues might instead convince us of an inaccurate, but more likely-seeming, source. And without any evidence to contradict that sound-source identification, it persists—“we need no other” (Fales, 58).

Such a contradiction could come through visual evidence. One could look at photos and videos of the musicians performing—“here’s John Lennon playing a Rickenbacker guitar”; “here’s Jimmy Smith playing a Hammond B-3 organ.” But digital music technologies, especially MIDI, mean that even these visual clues are not definitive evidence. The DX7 was one of the first instruments to implement MIDI technology, which sends computer messages about which keys are depressed and thus allows the DX7 to control other MIDI-capable instruments, modules, and computers. As a result, even in the 1980s, it was not uncommon to use a DX7 as a MIDI controller that triggered sounds from other rack-mounted synthesizers.

Another resource for learning about sound sources is musician interviews. This has often been my strategy when researching uses of the DX7: I comb old issues of music trade magazines such as Keyboard or Electronics & Music Maker, whose contributors and audience are generally fixated on gear, and read interviews until I find the obligatory question about gear. The musician interviewed is generally happy to explain whether they use rack-mounted modules or get sounds straight from a DX7, or whether they hate the DX7 altogether and don’t use it at all. (The DX7 was so ubiquitous in the long 1980s that it’s a constant point of reference in such interviews.)
This may work well enough for researchers of older music like this, but Keyboard has been out of print since 2017; Music Technology (née Electronics and Music Maker) since 1994; Making Music since 2002, for just some examples. Social media like forums, Reddit, and YouTube take over some of Keyboard’s functions, especially gear reviews, but the interviews intended for a niche audience are largely a thing of the past, as far as I can tell.

So if a researcher is interested in the instruments of newer popular music, what are they to do? How do they orient themselves in the basic facts of the matter, like “what instrument is this”? The immense timbral flexibility of synthesizers, the black-boxing effect of MIDI, DAWs obviating hardware synthesizers, and the decline of trade magazines dedicated to music technology seem to create a perfect storm of sound-source illegibility.

As a concrete example, let me recount my search for evidence that a DX7 produced the opening sound in “Versace on the Floor.” I checked the liner notes, but specific equipment used for the song is not mentioned. I consulted many interviews with Mars and associated musicians, but found no equipment mentioned in them. I watched concert footage available on YouTube, but the keyboards were visually obscure since the videos’ focus was Mars rather than his touring keyboardist (John Fossit). I was unable to find a way to get in touch with John Fossit. I did have a connection to Greg Phillinganes, who is credited for “keyboards” in the liner notes on the album. I thought this would clinch my success, but even he didn’t know what keyboard had been used for the opening—he wasn’t involved in the recording of the song’s opening, and overdubbed the synth lead solo that occurs later in the track. The takeaway here is that it’s extremely difficult to verify how a song was recorded these days, and while my journey with “Versace” is just one example, I’m certain other similar questions would have similar outcomes.

We’ve reached a point in music technology where the study of instruments must take on a new, perhaps less obvious, form. Bernd Enders (2017) divides the history of instruments into ten stages of technological evolution.

Enders’s project focuses on music composition, but this periodization of music-technological history can also describe how organology has needed to evolve simultaneously, particularly regarding materiality. When dealing with the first stage, materiality is of a central concern: is the instrument made of bone, or wood, or metal? What is vibrating—the air, a string, or a membrane? Proceeding through each subsequent stage of music technology introduces new research problems and pushes organological inquiry in new directions. For example, popular music instruments of the Modularization stage of technological development demands research encompassing not just the electric guitar, but also the amplifiers, effects pedals, and so on that a guitarist might connect to their instrument; as such, an analysis of these instruments might move away from focusing on the materiality of the electric guitar and onto analyzing the interactions between different modules of the signal chain. The advent of MIDI, digital sampling, and the virtualization of music-making renders a study of materiality nearly obsolete.

The Imagined DX7 illustrates that analysis of instruments doesn’t need to rely on concrete factual identification of the instrument in order to lead to meaningful insights. Indeed, for recent pop music, the question “how was this sound made?” is probably inevitably answered “with a DAW and VST.” Today’s musicians, especially those with the resources of Bruno Mars, can create any sound imaginable; more interesting than “how was it made?” is “why was it made?” What does it mean to be a hugely successful Top 40 artist and choose a sound for your record that’s been widely panned as dated, overused, and grating? What’s under examination in that question is the sound itself, the timbre, rather than the object that produced it. This isn’t to say that anything goes, or to encourage intellectual sloppiness or laziness in sound-source identification, but rather to suggest that if the identification works and is productive, perhaps we need no other, to borrow Fales’s phrasing. Accurately identifying the gear used in the recording is one avenue of research, but how many listeners can discern the difference between Dexed and a DX7? How many care? Does it impact the most interesting parts of my research?

Ultimately, what I am interested in is what it means to use a DX7 E. PIANO 1 sound—how listeners in 2016 experience such a distinctly ’80s sound, how the sound might prompt every review I found to mention the track’s retro sound, how the sound connects Bruno Mars to a specific lineage of R&B balladeers. When “Versace” starts, the timbre of the opening synthesizer immediately calls up all these associations of that familiar, even cheesy sound that “must die,” but in a sleek, revitalized, 2016 package. Not just anyone could pull this off, but Mars has the panache and the musical background to make the DX7 sound cool—or if not cool, then at least charming.

It isn’t particularly revolutionary to urge analysts to attend to what the sound means culturally; sound studies has done this for decades. The novelty is in thinking of this as a methodology for the analysis of musical instruments, an area that traditionally (and still) is preoccupied with gear—physical instruments and their material presentations—as sound sources. The critical idea here is that the timbre is the instrument. Timbre can carry the essence of an instrument even when the timbre is produced by something else, as in the case of the Imagined DX7. Timbral similarities, especially when combined with cultural plausibility, encourage the misattribution of a timbre to a sound source. Misattributed or not, the various instances of the (Imagined) DX7 sound all add new nodes to the vast web of intertextual meanings that the DX7 calls up. The practical obsolescence of hardware synthesizers means that traditional organological methods may fail, but even if we can’t know for certain what instrument is used in a recording, we can always learn what listeners believe the instrument to be.
